New Envelope mode proposal including private key derivation from OPRF output (#154)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-opaque: draft-irtf-cfrg-opaque.md

OPAQUE relies on the following protocols and primitives:

- Oblivious Pseudorandom Function (OPRF, {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-voprf}}, version -06):
  - GenerateKeyPair(): Generate an OPRF private and public key. OPAQUE only requires an OPRF private key. We write `(oprf_key, _) = GenerateKeyPair()` to denote use
    of this function for generating secret key `oprf_key` (and discarding the

>     corresponding public key).

Reviewer: This looks like the rebase dropped some stuff, which makes me somewhat worried. @kevinlewi is anything else missing?

    This function also needs to satisfy collision resistance.

# Client Credential Storage {#client-credential-storage}

OPAQUE makes use of a structure `Envelope` to manage client credentials. This envelope holds information about its format and content for the client to obtain its authentication material.

OPAQUE allows applications to either provide custom client private and public keys for authentication, or to generate them internally, making the application oblivious to the client's private key.

These two options are defined as the `Internal Key` and `External Key` modes.  See {{envelope-modes}} for their specifications.

Credential material is used to pin key material to identities if desired. If no identity is given for a party, its value MUST default to its public key. The following types of credentials are hereby considered:

- client_private_key: The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol.
- server_public_key: The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol.
- client_identity: The client identity. This is an application-specific value, e.g., an e-mail address or normal account name. If not specified, it defaults to the client's public key.

> - server_identity: The server identity. This is typically a domain name, e.g., example.com.  If not specified, it defaults to the server's public key.

Reviewer 2: I like the way this is written! Let's just remove all of the other references to this identity being "optional" in the later texts, and we can clarify that it defaults to the client_public_key and server_public_key.

  See {{identities}} for information about this identity.

They are used in the `SecretCredentials` and `CleartextCredentials` structures are defined as follows:
~~~
struct {
 opaque client_private_key[Nsk];
} SecretCredentials;

struct {
 opaque server_public_key[Npk];
 opaque client_identity<0..2^16-1>;
 opaque server_identity<0..2^16-1>;
} CleartextCredentials;
~~~

During protocol execution, they are recommended to be stored in a `Credentials` object with the following named fields:

- `client_private_key`, the client's private key
- `client_public_key`, the client's public key corresponding to `client_private_key`
- `client_identity`, an optional client identity (present only in the `custom_identifier` mode)

> - `server_identity`, an optional server identity (present only in the `custom_identifier` mode)

Reviewer 2: reference to `custom_identifier` mode which needs to be updated

Author: That's a leftover, well spotted!

<!-- TODO(Daniel):
I don't think the second part of the following is still relevant given the 3DH setup.
-->

> Each public and private key value is an opaque byte string, specific to the AKE protocol in which OPAQUE is instantiated. For example, if used as raw public keys for TLS 1.3 {{?RFC8446}}, they may be RSA or ECDSA keys as per {{?RFC7250}}.

Author: > For example, if used as raw public keys for TLS 1.3 {{?RFC8446}}, they may be RSA or ECDSA keys as per {{?RFC7250}}.
This is not relevant anymore in that part of the document.

A client `Envelope` is constructed independently from the `EnvelopeMode`, only the `InnerEnvelope` varies.
`Envelope` is constructed as follows:
~~~
struct {
 InnerEnvelope inner_env;
 opaque auth_tag[Nh];
} Envelope;
~~~
inner_env
: A mode dependent `InnerEnvelope` specifying at least the `EnvelopeMode`.

auth_tag
: Authentication tag protecting the contents of the envelope, covering `InnerEnvelope` and `CleartextCredentials`.

The `BuildEnvelope` function allows a client to create its `Envelope` at registration.
~~~
CreateEnvelope(y, pks, creds)

Parameters:
- params, the MHF parameters established out of band
- mode, the InnerEnvelope mode
- Nh, the output size of the Hash function

Input:
- y, finalized OPRF output
- creds, a Credentials structure
- pks, the server AKE public key

Output:
- envelope, the client's `Envelope` structure
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key
- export_key, an additional key

Steps:
1. envelope_nonce = random(32)
2. prk = HKDF-Extract(envelope_nonce, Harden(y, params))
3. auth_key = HKDF-Expand(prk, "AuthKey", Nh)
4. export_key = HKDF-Expand(prk, "ExportKey", Nh)
5. inner_env, client_public_key = BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, creds)

> 6. Create CleartextCredentials cleartext_creds with response.server_public_key and custom identifiers creds.client_identity and creds.server_identity if mode is custom_identifier

Reviewer 2: reference to `custom_identifier` mode which needs to be updated

7. auth_tag = HMAC(auth_key, concat(inner_env, cleartext_creds))
8. Output (envelope, client_public_key, export_key)
~~~

The `RecoverEnvelope` function allows a client to recover its `Envelope` at authentication.
~~~  
RecoverEnvelope(y, pks, creds, envelope)

Parameters:
- params, the MHF parameters established out of band
- mode, the InnerEnvelope mode
- Nh, the output size of the Hash function

Input:
- y, finalized OPRF output
- pks, the server AKE public key
- creds, a Credentials structure
- envelope, the client's `Envelope` structure
  
Output:
- secret_creds, SecretCredentials
- export_key, an additional key

Steps:
1. prk = HKDF-Extract(envelope_nonce, Harden(y, params))
2. auth_key = HKDF-Expand(prk, "AuthKey", Nh)
3. export_key = HKDF-Expand(prk, "ExportKey", Nh)

> 4. Create CleartextCredentials cleartext_creds with response.server_public_key and custom identifiers creds.client_identity and creds.server_identity if mode is custom_identifier

Reviewer 2: reference to `custom_identifier` mode which needs to be updated

6. If !ct_equal(envelope.auth_tag, expected_tag),
    raise DecryptionError
7. secret_creds = RecoverSecret(prk, envelope.inner_env)
8. Output (secret_creds, export_key)
~~~

## Envelope Modes {#envelope-modes}

The `EnvelopeMode` specifies the structure and encoding of the corresponding `InnerEnvelope`. This document specifies the values of the two aformentionned modes:
~~~
enum {
 internal(1),
 external(2),
 (255)
} EnvelopeMode;
~~~

Each `EnvelopeMode` defines:
- its own `InnerEnvelope` structure
- the `BuildInnerEnvelope` function to build the `InnerEnvelope` structure
- the `RecoverSecret` function to obtain the private key

The inputs to HKDF-Extract and HKDF-Expand are as specified in {{RFC5869}}. The underlying hash function
is that which is associated with the OPAQUE configuration (see {{configurations}}).

<!-- TODO(Daniel):
todo: explain rationale

- this document defines opaque with 3DH
- 3DH is over POG, i.e. can leverage internal hash-to-scalar Key gen
- no need for the application to deal with key generation, no encrypted creds
- for compatibility with other AKEs, external mode that allows arbitrary key kind importation with encrypted credentials.

> -->

Author: I will do a commit on this later

### Internal Key mode {#internal-mode}

In this mode, the client's private and public keys are generated from a seed derived from the OPRF output. This requires the AKE to support key pair generation from a seed. The generated keys are therefore compatible with the AKE by design.

For example, in the setup of 3DH using the prime-order groups defined in OPRF(reference), the secret key is generated using a HashToScalar(x) function that deterministically maps the hardened OPRF output to an element of the field, as defined in the hash to field function in {{!I-D.irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve}}. The public key is the result of the scalar multiplication of the group's base point with the private key.

With the internal key mode, the `InnerEnvelope` is constructed as follows:
~~~
struct {
 EnvelopeMode mode;
 opaque nonce[32];
 } InnerEnvelope;
~~~
mode
: The `EnvelopeMode` value. This MUST be `internal`.

nonce
: A unique 32-byte nonce used to protect this Envelope.

<!-- TODO(Daniel):

> 1. Describe KeyGenFromSeed(seed) in general

Author: I'm open to suggestions on how to best formulate this.
I'm thinking of something around this

> KeyGenFromSeed(seed): expand the seed to full private/public generation in the AKE setup

Reviewer 2: Can't this just be equal to hash_to_field with a specific DST?

Author: I think we should describe a generic `KeyGenFromSeed(seed)` here, and then specify that in OPAQUE-3DH we use `hash_to_field` with dst etc.. This way, it stays relevant for other AKEs, that  just need to define their own `KeyGenFromSeed(seed)` implementation.

Reviewer: (Discussed offline) let's just mimic what the VOPRF draft does for HashToScalar here :)

2. Describe key gen = HashToScalar(prk, "OPAQUE04-HashToScalar") in the 3DH setup

> 3. Define HashToScalar and ScalarBaseMult

Author: @chris-wood I think we should define the HashToScalar similarly to what has been done in VOPRF. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Either hash_to_field or HashToScalar from VOPRF (may be cleaner to just specify hash_to_field from the h2c spec)

Author: Maybe "redefine but with the same definition as in VOPRF", just to make clear not to use VOPRF's DST for this hash_to_field

Reviewer: I think the implementation should be something like:

```
sk = HashToScalar(seed)
pk = sk * G
```

Author: ok, with something like "OPAQUE-HashToScalar" for dst?

A client `Envelope` is constructed independently from the `EnvelopeMode`, but offers an `InnerEnvelope` entry that modes can use as they see fit.
`Envelope` is constructed as follows:

~~~
struct {
 EnvelopeMode mode;
 opaque nonce[Nn];
 opaque auth_tag[Nm];
 InnerEnvelope inner_env;
} Envelope;
~~~

mode : The `EnvelopeMode` used for the `Envelope`.

nonce : A unique nonce of length `Nn` used to protect this Envelope.

auth_tag : Authentication tag protecting the contents of the envelope, covering `EnvelopeMode`, envelope nonce, `InnerEnvelope` and `CleartextCredentials`.

inner_env : A mode dependent `InnerEnvelope` structure. See {{envelope-modes}} for its specifications.

The size of the serialized envelope is denoted `Ne` and varies based on the mode. The exact value for `Ne` is specified in {{internal-mode}} and {{external-mode}}.

The `CreateEnvelope` function allows a client to create its `Envelope` at registration.

~~~
CreateEnvelope(prk, server_public_key, client_private_key, creds)

Parameter:
- mode, the EnvelopeMode mode

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- server_public_key, The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol

> - client_private_key, The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol

Author: Add `This is nil in internal mode`

With the internal key mode the `EnvelopeMode` value MUST be `internal` and the `InnerEnvelope` is empty, and the size `Ne` of the serialized `Envelope` is 1 + Nn + Nm.

To generate the private key OPAQUE-3DH implements `DeriveAkeKeyPair(seed)` as follows:

~~~
DeriveAkeKeyPair(seed)

Parameter:
- dst, domain separation tag for HashToScalar set to "OPAQUE-HashToScalar"

Input:
- seed, pseudo-random byte sequence used as a seed

Output:
- private_key, a private key
- public_key, the associated public key

Steps:
1. private_key = HashToScalar(seed, dst)
2. public_key = private_key * G
3. Output (private_key, public_key)
~~~

HashToScalar(msg, dst): Hash arbitrary input to a scalar in the field of the AKE group as defined in {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-voprf}}, except that dst = "OPAQUE-HashToScalar".

~~~
BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, nonce, client_private_key)

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- nonce, a unique nonce of length `Nn`
- client_private_key, empty value. Not used in this function, it only serves to comply with the API

Output:
- inner_env, nil value (serves to comply with the API)
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key

Steps:

> 1. seed = Expand(prk, concat(nonce, "PrivateKey"), Nsk)

Reviewer 2: Why is the length of the seed that is passed as input to DeriveAkeKeyPair of length `Nsk`?

Shouldn't it be `Nh`?

cc: @chris-wood

Author: Yes, you're right !

Author: ftr: reverting this change, as the amount of entropy in the seed should be no less than the amount of entropy in a private key

We let `Npk` and `Nsk` denote the size of public and private keys, respectively,
used in the AKE.

- Deterministic AKE Key Generation Functions:
  - RecoverPublicKey(private_key): Recover the public key related to the input private key.
  - DeriveAkeKeyPair(seed): Derive a private and public key pair deterministically from the seed.

Random nonces used in this protocol are of length `Nn = 32` bytes.

> We define `nil` as a lack of value.

Reviewer: Can we move this to the notation section above?

# Client Credential Storage {#client-credential-storage}

OPAQUE makes use of a structure `Envelope` to manage client credentials. This envelope holds information about its format and content for the client to obtain its authentication material.

OPAQUE allows applications to either provide custom client private and public keys for authentication or to generate them internally, making the application oblivious to the client's private key. Each public and private key value is an opaque byte string, specific to the AKE protocol in which OPAQUE is instantiated.

> These two options are defined as the `Internal Key` and `External Key` modes.  See {{envelope-modes}} for their specifications.

Reviewer: Can we call this "Internal" and "External", rather than "Internal Key" and "External Key"?

> Credential material is used to pin key material to identities if desired. If no identity is given for a party, its value MUST default to its public key. The following types of credentials are hereby considered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications may pin key material to identities if desired. If no identity is given for a party, its value MUST default to its public key. The following types of application credential information are hereby considered:
```

- client_private_key: The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol.
- client_public_key: The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol.
- server_public_key: The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol.
- client_identity: The client identity. This is an application-specific value, e.g., an e-mail address or normal account name. If not specified, it defaults to the client's public key.
- server_identity: The server identity. This is typically a domain name, e.g., example.com.  If not specified, it defaults to the server's public key.
  See {{identities}} for information about this identity.

> These values are used in the `CleartextCredentials` structure as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These credential values are used in the `CleartextCredentials` structure as follows:
```

~~~
struct {
 opaque server_public_key[Npk];
 opaque server_identity<1..2^16-1>;
 opaque client_identity<1..2^16-1>;
} CleartextCredentials;
~~~

> The function CreateCleartextCredentials implements this logic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function CreateCleartextCredentials constructs a `CleartextCredentials` structure given application credential information.
```

~~~
CreateCleartextCredentials(server_public_key, client_public_key, server_identity, client_identity)

Input:
- server_public_key, The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol
- client_public_key, The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol
- server_identity, The optional encoded server identity, which is nil if not specified
- client_identity, The optional encoded client identity, which is nil if not specified

Output:
- cleartext_credentials, a CleartextCredentials structure

Steps:
1. if server_identity == nil
2.  server_identity = server_public_key
3. if client_identity == nil
4.  client_identity = client_public_key
5. Create CleartextCredentials cleartext_credentials with (server_public_key, server_identity, client_identity)
6. Output cleartext_credentials
~~~

During protocol execution, the identity values can be stored in an implementation-specific `Credentials` object with names matching the values.

~~~
struct {
 opaque server_identity;
 opaque client_identity;
} Credentials;
~~~

## Envelope Structure {#envelope-structure}

> A client `Envelope` is constructed independently from the `EnvelopeMode`, but offers an `InnerEnvelope` entry that modes can use as they see fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client `Envelope` is constructed independently from the `EnvelopeMode`, but offers an `InnerEnvelope` entry whose structure is determined by the mode. Future modes MAY introduce alternate `InnerEnvelope` contents.
```

`Envelope` is constructed as follows:

~~~
struct {
 EnvelopeMode mode;
 opaque nonce[Nn];
 opaque auth_tag[Nm];
 InnerEnvelope inner_env;
} Envelope;
~~~

mode : The `EnvelopeMode` used for the `Envelope`.

nonce : A unique nonce of length `Nn` used to protect this Envelope.

auth_tag : Authentication tag protecting the contents of the envelope, covering `EnvelopeMode`, envelope nonce, `InnerEnvelope` and `CleartextCredentials`.

inner_env : A mode dependent `InnerEnvelope` structure. See {{envelope-modes}} for its specifications.

The size of the serialized envelope is denoted `Ne` and varies based on the mode. The exact value for `Ne` is specified in {{internal-mode}} and {{external-mode}}.

> The `CreateEnvelope` function allows a client to create its `Envelope` at registration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients create an `Envelope` at registration with the function `CreateEnvelope` defined below.
```

For the `external` key mode, implementations are free to addtionnally provide the `client_public_key` to this function. With this the the public key doesn't have to be recovered in BuildInnerEnvelope() (thus saving a scalar multiplication) and that function must then be adapted accordingly.
For the `internal` key mode, implementations can chose to leave the `client_private_key` out completely, as it is not used.

~~~
CreateEnvelope(prk, server_public_key, client_private_key, creds)

Parameter:
- mode, the EnvelopeMode mode

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- server_public_key, The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol
- client_private_key, The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol. This is nil in the internal key mode

> - server_identity, The encoded server identity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- server_identity, The optional encoded server identity
```

> - client_identity, The encoded client identity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- client_identity, The optional encoded client identity
```

Output:
- envelope, the client's `Envelope` structure
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key
- masking_key, a key used by the server to preserve the confidentiality of the envelope during login
- export_key, an additional key

Steps:
1. envelope_nonce = random(Nn)
2. auth_key = Expand(prk, concat(envelope_nonce, "AuthKey"), Nh)
3. export_key = Expand(prk, concat(envelope_nonce, "ExportKey"), Nh)
4. masking_key = Expand(prk, "MaskingKey", Nh)
5. inner_env, client_public_key = BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, envelope_nonce, client_private_key)
6. cleartext_creds = CreateCleartextCredentials(server_public_key, client_public_key, server_identity, client_identity)
7. auth_tag = MAC(auth_key, concat(mode, envelope_nonce, inner_env, cleartext_creds))
8. Create Envelope envelope with (mode, envelope_nonce, auth_tag, inner_env)
9. Output (envelope, client_public_key, masking_key, export_key)
~~~

> The `RecoverEnvelope` function allows a client to recover its `Envelope` at authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients recover their `Envelope` during authentication with the `RecoverEnvelope` function defined below.
```

~~~  
RecoverEnvelope(prk, server_public_key, creds, envelope)

Parameter:
- mode, the EnvelopeMode mode

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- server_public_key, The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol
- creds, a Credentials structure
- envelope, the client's `Envelope` structure
  
Output:
- client_private_key, The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol
- export_key, an additional key

Steps:
1. auth_key = Expand(prk, concat(envelope.nonce, "AuthKey"), Nh)
2. export_key = Expand(prk, concat(envelope.nonce, "ExportKey", Nh)
3. client_private_key, client_public_key = RecoverKeys(prk, envelope.nonce, envelope.inner_env)
4. cleartext_creds = CreateCleartextCredentials(server_public_key, client_public_key, creds.server_identity, creds.client_identity)
5. expected_tag = MAC(auth_key, concat(mode, envelope_nonce, inner_env, cleartext_creds))
6. If !ct_equal(envelope.auth_tag, expected_tag),
     raise MacError
7. Output (client_private_key, export_key)
~~~

## Envelope Modes {#envelope-modes}

> The `EnvelopeMode` specifies the structure and encoding of the corresponding `InnerEnvelope`. This document specifies the values of the two aformentionned modes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `EnvelopeMode` specifies the structure and encoding of the corresponding `InnerEnvelope`. This document specifies the values of the two aformentioned modes:
```

Author: I believe it's `aforementioned` ! :)

~~~
enum {
 internal(1),
 external(2),
 (255)
} EnvelopeMode;
~~~

Each `EnvelopeMode` defines its own `InnerEnvelope` structure and must implement the following interface:
- `inner_env, client_public_key = BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, nonce, client_private_key)`: build and return the mode's `InnerEnvelope` structure and the client's public key.

> - `client_private_key, client_public_key = RecoverKeys(prk, nonce, inner_env)`: recover and return the client's private and public keys for the AKE protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `client_private_key, client_public_key = RecoverKeys(prk, nonce, inner_env)`: recover and return the client's private and public keys for the AKE protocol.

The implementation of this interface for both `internal` and `external` modes is in {{internal-mode}} and {{external-mode}}, respectively.
```

### Internal Key mode {#internal-mode}

In this mode, the client's private and public keys are deterministically derived from the OPRF output. 

With the internal key mode the `EnvelopeMode` value MUST be `internal` and the `InnerEnvelope` is empty, and the size `Ne` of the serialized `Envelope` is 1 + Nn + Nm.

To generate the private key OPAQUE-3DH implements `DeriveAkeKeyPair(seed)` as follows:

~~~
DeriveAkeKeyPair(seed)

Parameter:
- dst, domain separation tag for HashToScalar set to "OPAQUE-HashToScalar"

Input:
- seed, pseudo-random byte sequence used as a seed

Output:
- private_key, a private key
- public_key, the associated public key

Steps:
1. private_key = HashToScalar(seed, dst)
2. public_key = private_key * G
3. Output (private_key, public_key)
~~~

> HashToScalar(msg, dst): Hash arbitrary input to a scalar in the field of the AKE group as defined in {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-voprf}}, except that dst = "OPAQUE-HashToScalar".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HashToScalar(msg, dst) is as specified in {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-voprf}}, except that dst = "OPAQUE-HashToScalar".
```

- nonce, a unique nonce of length `Nn`
- inner_env, an InnerEnvelope structure. Not used in this function, it only serves to comply with the API

Output:
- client_private_key, The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol
- client_public_key, The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol

Steps:
1. seed = Expand(prk, concat(nonce, "PrivateKey"), Nh)
2. client_private_key, client_public_key = DeriveAkeKeyPair(seed)
4. Output (client_private_key, client_public_key)
~~~

### External Key mode {#external-mode}

With the external key mode the `EnvelopeMode` value MUST be `external`, and the size `Ne` of the serialized `Envelope` is 1 + Nn + Nm + Nsk.

In this mode, the client's public key is recovered using the private key. An encryption key is generated from the hardened OPRF output and used to encrypt the client's private key, which is then stored encrypted in the `InnerEnvelope`. This allows for applications that prefer to use custom keys.

~~~
struct {
 opaque encrypted_creds[Nsk];
} InnerEnvelope;
~~~

encrypted_creds : Encrypted client_private_key. Authentication of this field is ensured with the `AuthTag` in the envelope that covers this `InnerEnvelope`.

> If the implementation provides the `client_public_key` to `CreateEnvelope()`, then `BuildInnerEnvelope()` should spare the `RecoverPublicKey()` call as the key is already available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the implementation provides the `client_public_key` to `CreateEnvelope()`, then `BuildInnerEnvelope()` MAY skip the `RecoverPublicKey()` call and use the public key provided.
```

Author: `BuildInnerEnvelope()` doesn't need to use the public key

We let `Npk` and `Nsk` denote the size of public and private keys, respectively,
used in the AKE.

- Deterministic Key Generation Functions:
  - RecoverPublicKey(private_key): Recover the public key related to the input private key.

>   - DeriveKeyPair(seed): Derive a private and public key pair deterministically from the seed.

Reviewer: Hmm, these don't correspond to the OPRF, though, but are for the prime-order group keys, right?

>   - DeriveKeyPair(seed): Derive a private and public key pair deterministically from the seed.

Reviewer: Additionally, @kevinlewi's change introduced DeriveKeyPair on the OPRF API. We need a different function name for the prime-order group variant. Perhaps, `DeriveGroupKeyPair`?

>   - DeriveKeyPair(seed): Derive a private and public key pair deterministically from the seed.

Author: Sorry !

hm, indeed, these are for the AKE.

1. Should I reintroduce Kevin's `- DeriveKeyPair(seed): Derive a private and public key pair deterministically from a seed.` into the OPRF section?
2. I suggest we call it `DeriveAkeKeyPair` to make it very explicit

> Generally, nonces are of length `Nn` set to 32 bytes.

Reviewer 2: Can we remove the word "generally"? Or are there exceptions to this rule? Also, is there ever a case where `Nn` is not equal to 32, and if so, can we just remove the use of this extra variable and hard-code 32 in place of `Nn`?

Author: +1 for dropping generally

On the other hand, I'm less comfortable with hardcoding values. But if you both think we should revert to do it, I can live with that :)

Author: I just saw @chris-wood  suggestion !

> Generally, nonces are of length `Nn` set to 32 bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Random nonces used in this protocol are of length `Nn = 32` bytes.
```

# Client Credential Storage {#client-credential-storage}

OPAQUE makes use of a structure `Envelope` to manage client credentials. This envelope holds information about its format and content for the client to obtain its authentication material.

OPAQUE allows applications to either provide custom client private and public keys for authentication or to generate them internally, making the application oblivious to the client's private key. Each public and private key value is an opaque byte string, specific to the AKE protocol in which OPAQUE is instantiated.

> These two options are defined as the `Internal Key` and `External Key` modes.  See {{envelope-modes}} for their specifications.

Reviewer 3: >OPAQUE allows applications to either provide custom client private and public keys for authentication or to generate them internally, making the application oblivious to the client's private key. Each public and private key value is an opaque byte string, specific to the AKE protocol in which OPAQUE is instantiated.
>
>These two options are defined as the Internal Key and External Key modes. See {{envelope-modes}} for their specifications.

Could we maybe be even more explicit to state that the the `EnvelopeMode` is external when a separate application(s) provide custom client private and public keys for authentication? 

>or to generate them internally

And then a secondary statement which states the complimentary where the `EnvelopeMode` is internal when it is not the case when a separate application(s) provide custom client private and public keys for authentication. 

Apologies if I'm falling out of the sky into this PR.  I've been following OPAQUE and TLS OPAQUE loosely for a bit.

Author: Hello 👋

The key can be provided by the same application or the wrapper protocol. A usage example is when the same application needs the private key for some other use (with the internal mode, the private key never leaves the AKE). So it's not just for use with external applications.

Author: Does this answer your question? Happy to discuss if you don't agree :)

Reviewer 3: >A usage example is when the same application needs the private key for some other use (with the internal mode, the private key never leaves the AKE).

That is a lot clearer thank you @bytemare  !

Author: But you are right, this is a totally valid use case and we could include that example. Thanks!

Author: Do you think that the following phrase

> OPAQUE allows applications to either provide custom client private and public keys for authentication

covers your following use case not explicitly enough?

> when a separate application(s) provide custom client private and public keys for authentication

Even if provided by an external application, it is still the wrapper application that implements or integrates OPAQUE that will import the keys.

- client_private_key: The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol.
- client_public_key: The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol.
- server_public_key: The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol.
- client_identity: The client identity. This is an application-specific value, e.g., an e-mail address or normal account name. If not specified, it defaults to the client's public key.
- server_identity: The server identity. This is typically a domain name, e.g., example.com.  If not specified, it defaults to the server's public key.
  See {{identities}} for information about this identity.

These values are used in `SecretCredentials` and `CleartextCredentials` structures as follows:

~~~
struct {
 opaque client_private_key[Nsk];
} SecretCredentials;

struct {
 opaque server_public_key[Npk];
 opaque server_identity<1..2^16-1>;
 opaque client_identity<1..2^16-1>;
} CleartextCredentials;
~~~

The function CreateCleartextCredentials implements this logic:

~~~

> CreateCleartextCredentials(server_public_key, client_public_key, server_identity, client_identity)

Author: `CreateCleartextCredentials()`
The name might be misleading for the new reader.

Input:
- server_public_key, The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol
- client_public_key, The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol
- server_identity, The encoded server identity
- client_identity, The encoded client identity

Output:
- cleartext_credentials, a CleartextCredentials structure

Steps:
1. if server_public_key == nil || client_public_key == nil
2.  raise NoPubKeyError

> 3. if server_identity == nil

Reviewer 2: We should define nil somewhere, or just turn this into pseudocode by saying "if server_identity not specified". Same for client_identity

Reviewer: Alternatively, we can modify the parameter description to read:

```
- server_public_key, The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol, which is nil if not specified
```

Author: No, the server public MUST NOT be nil, it's the client's key that can be nil

Reviewer: 🤦 duh, yes, sorry. This only applies to the client.

4.  server_identity = server_public_key
5. if client_identity == nil
6.  client_identity = client_public_key
8. Create CleartextCredentials cleartext_credentials with (server_public_key, server_identity, client_identity)
9. Output cleartext_credentials
~~~

During protocol execution, the identity values can be stored in an implementation-specific `Credentials` object with names matching the values.

~~~
struct {
 opaque server_identity;
 opaque client_identity;
} Credentials;
~~~

## Envelope Structure {#envelope-structure}

A client `Envelope` is constructed independently from the `EnvelopeMode`, but offers an `InnerEnvelope` entry that modes can use as they see fit.
`Envelope` is constructed as follows:

~~~
struct {
 EnvelopeMode mode;
 opaque nonce[Nn];
 opaque auth_tag[Nm];
 InnerEnvelope inner_env;
} Envelope;
~~~

mode : The `EnvelopeMode` used for the `Envelope`.

nonce : A unique nonce of length `Nn` used to protect this Envelope.

auth_tag : Authentication tag protecting the contents of the envelope, covering `EnvelopeMode`, envelope nonce, `InnerEnvelope` and `CleartextCredentials`.

> inner_env : A mode dependent `InnerEnvelope` specifying at least the `EnvelopeMode`.

Reviewer 2: "specifying at least the `EnvelopeMode`."

That's no longer true, right?

Reviewer 2: Can you also perhaps add a reference in the doc to where a reader can find the definition(s) of `InnerEnvelope`? Because they haven't been defined yet and it can cause confusion

Author: Yes, true, well spotted.

> The size of the serialized envelope is denoted `Ne` and varies in function of the `InnerEnvelope` length used by the modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The size of the serialized envelope is denoted `Ne` and varies based on the mode. The exact value for `Ne` is specified in {{internal-mode}} and {{external-mode}}.
```

Author: Perfect, much better 👌  thanks !

The `CreateEnvelope` function allows a client to create its `Envelope` at registration.

~~~
CreateEnvelope(random_pwd, server_public_key, client_secret_key, creds)

Parameters:
- params, the MHF parameters established out of band
- mode, the EnvelopeMode mode
- Nn, the nonce length

Input:

> - y, finalized OPRF output

Reviewer: I would prefer that the hardened output (prk) be passed to this function (this function already does a lot).

Author: Done!

- server_public_key, the server's AKE public key
- client_secret_key, the client's private key

> - creds, a Credentials structure

Author: i.e. dropping the need for the `Credentials` structure right? (I'm in favor)

~~~
BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, nonce, client_secret_key)

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- nonce, a unique nonce of length `Nn`
- client_secret_key, empty value. Not used in this function, it only serves to comply with the API

Output:
- inner_env, nil value (serves to comply with the API)
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key

Steps:
1. seed = Expand(prk, concat(nonce, "PrivateKey"), Nsk)
2. _, client_public_key = DeriveKeyPair(seed)
3. Output (nil, client_public_key)
~~~

~~~
RecoverKeys(prk, nonce, inner_env)

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- nonce, a unique nonce of length `Nn`
- inner_env, an InnerEnvelope structure. Not used in this function, it only serves to comply with the API

Output:
- secret_creds, SecretCredentials
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key

Steps:
1. seed = Expand(prk, concat(nonce, "PrivateKey"), Nsk)
2. client_secret_key, client_public_key = DeriveKeyPair(seed)
3. Create SecretCredentials secret_creds with skc
4. Output (secret_creds, client_public_key)
~~~

### External Key mode {#external-mode}

> With the internal key mode the `EnvelopeMode` value MUST be `external`, and the size `Ne` of the serialized `Envelope` is 1 + Nn + Nm + Nsk.

Reviewer 2: internal key -> external key

Clients MUST NOT use the same key pair (client_private_key, client_public_key) for two different accounts.

## Setup Phase {#setup-phase}

In a setup phase, C chooses its password, and S chooses its own pair of private-public
AKE keys (server_private_key, server_public_key) for use with the AKE, along with an Nh-byte oprf_seed. S can use
the same pair of keys with multiple clients and can opt to use multiple seeds (so long as they are
kept consistent for each client). These steps can happen offline, i.e., before the registration phase.

Once complete, the registration process proceeds as follows.

## Credential Registration

~~~
 Client (password, creds)            Server (server_private_key, server_public_key, credential_identifier, oprf_seed)
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
 (request, blind) = CreateRegistrationRequest(password)

                               request
                      ------------------------->

            (response, oprf_key) = CreateRegistrationResponse(request, server_public_key, credential_identifier, oprf_seed)

                               response
                      <-------------------------

>  (record, export_key) = FinalizeRequest(password, creds, blind, response)

Reviewer 2: The API for FinalizeRequest should be updated (first argument is the client_private_key now)

We let `Npk` and `Nsk` denote the size of public and private keys, respectively,
used in the AKE.

- Deterministic Key Pair Generation Function:
  - DeriveKeyPair(seed): Derive a private and public key pair deterministically from the seed.

>   - HashToScalar(msg, dst): Hash arbitrary input to a scalar in the field of the AKE group as defined in {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-voprf}}, except with dst = "OPAQUE-HashToScalar".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This isn't an API that's exposed outside of its use in DeriveKeyPair, right? If not, we can probably drop it from here, and describe it where we specify how to implement DeriveKeyPair. (In the configurations section?)

These two options are defined as the `Internal Key` and `External Key` modes.  See {{envelope-modes}} for their specifications.

Credential material is used to pin key material to identities if desired. If no identity is given for a party, its value MUST default to its public key. The following types of credentials are hereby considered:

- client_private_key: The encoded client private key for the AKE protocol.
- client_public_key: The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol.
- server_public_key: The encoded server public key for the AKE protocol.
- client_identity: The client identity. This is an application-specific value, e.g., an e-mail address or normal account name. If not specified, it defaults to the client's public key.
- server_identity: The server identity. This is typically a domain name, e.g., example.com.  If not specified, it defaults to the server's public key.
  See {{identities}} for information about this identity.

These values are used in `SecretCredentials` and `CleartextCredentials` structures as follows:
~~~
struct {
 opaque client_private_key[Nsk];
} SecretCredentials;

struct {
 opaque server_public_key[Npk];
 opaque client_public_key[Npk];

>  opaque server_identity<0..2^16-1>;
>  opaque client_identity<0..2^16-1>;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 opaque server_identity<1..2^16-1>;
 opaque client_identity<1..2^16-1>;
```

(Since neither field can be empty)

} CleartextCredentials;
~~~

The function CreateCleartextCredentials implements this logic:

> ~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion

~~~
```

Input:
- server_public_key, The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol
- client_public_key, The encoded client public key for the AKE protocol
- server_identity, The encoded server identity
- client_identity, The encoded client identity

Output:
- cleartext_credentials, a CleartextCredentials structure

Steps:
1. if server_public_key == nil || client_public_key == nil
2.  raise NoPubKeyError
3. if server_identity == nil
4.  server_identity = server_public_key
5. if client_identity == nil
6.  client_identity = client_public_key
8. Create CleartextCredentials cleartext_credentials with (server_public_key, client_public_key, server_identity, client_identity)
9. Output cleartext_credentials
~~~

During protocol execution, these values can be stored in an implementation-specific `Credentials` object with names matching the values. For example, `Credentials.server_public_key` is the server's public key.

## Envelope Structure {#envelope-structure}

A client `Envelope` is constructed independently from the `EnvelopeMode`, but offers an `InnerEnvelope` entry that modes can use as they see fit.
`Envelope` is constructed as follows:

> ~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion

~~~
```

struct {
 EnvelopeMode mode;
 opaque nonce[Nn];

>  opaque auth_tag[Nh];

Reviewer: Why is `auth_tag` _before_ `inner_env`? It seems like `auth_tag` should cover the entire envelope, right?

Author: `auth_tag` covers the entire envelope, indeed, but putting it before `inner_env` ensures it's always in the same position, regardless of the mode, and thus simplifies parsing. What do you think?

Reviewer: Yep, that makes sense. Let's leave this as-is.

 InnerEnvelope inner_env;
} Envelope;
~~~

mode : The `EnvelopeMode` used for the `Envelope`.

nonce : A unique nonce of length `Nn` used to protect this Envelope.

> auth_tag : Authentication tag protecting the contents of the envelope, covering `InnerEnvelope` and `CleartextCredentials`.

Reviewer: This also includes `mode` and `nonce`, right?

Author: Yes, it does! Well spotted.

inner_env : A mode dependent `InnerEnvelope` specifying at least the `EnvelopeMode`.

The `CreateEnvelope` function allows a client to create its `Envelope` at registration.
~~~

> CreateEnvelope(y, pks, creds)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CreateEnvelope(random_pwd, server_public_key, creds)
```

Reviewer: (here and below!)

Parameters:
- params, the MHF parameters established out of band
- mode, the EnvelopeMode mode
- Nx, the output size of the Extract function
- Nn, the nonce length

Input:
- y, finalized OPRF output
- creds, a Credentials structure
- pks, the server AKE public key

Output:
- envelope, the client's `Envelope` structure
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key
- export_key, an additional key

Steps:
1. envelope_nonce = random(Nn)

> 2. prk = Extract(envelope_nonce, Harden(y, params))

Reviewer: @kevinlewi's change removed the nonce from this step, so we can probably lift derivation of `prk` to the function that calls `CreateEnvelope`.

3. auth_key = Expand(prk, "AuthKey", Nx)
4. export_key = Expand(prk, "ExportKey", Nx)
5. inner_env, client_public_key = BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, creds)
6. cleartext_creds = CreateCleartextCredentials(response.server_public_key, client_public_key, creds.server_identity, creds.client_identity)
7. auth_tag = MAC(auth_key, concat(mode, envelope_nonce, inner_env, cleartext_creds))
8. Create Envelope envelope with (mode, envelope_nonce, auth_tag, inner_env)
9. Output (envelope, client_public_key, export_key)
~~~

> The `RecoverEnvelope` function allows a client to recover its `Envelope` at authentication. Note that the `creds` structure MUST at least hold the server_public_key and client_public_key values.

Reviewer: The server public key is passed in as a parameter (as part of the CredentialResponse), so why is it needed to be part of `creds`?

Author: Indeed, I think this is a leftover of a drafting phase. In my implementation, I only use this field to pass the server public key to the server when responding on login. Thanks for spotting this !

Author: And that I'm thinking of it, client_public_key isn't necessary either.

Author: Fixed.

5. expected_tag = MAC(auth_key, concat(mode, envelope_nonce, inner_env, cleartext_creds))
6. If !ct_equal(envelope.auth_tag, expected_tag),
    raise MacError
7. secret_creds = RecoverSecret(prk, envelope.inner_env)
8. Output (secret_creds, export_key)
~~~

## Envelope Modes {#envelope-modes}

The `EnvelopeMode` specifies the structure and encoding of the corresponding `InnerEnvelope`. This document specifies the values of the two aformentionned modes:
~~~
enum {
 internal(1),
 external(2),
 (255)
} EnvelopeMode;
~~~

Each `EnvelopeMode` defines its own `InnerEnvelope` structure and must implement the following interface:
- `inner_env, client_public_key = BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, creds)`: build and return the `InnerEnvelope` structure and the client's public key.
- `secret_creds = RecoverSecret(prk, inner_env)`: recover and return the `SecretCredentials` structure.

The inputs to Extract and Expand are as specified in {{RFC5869}}. The underlying hash function
is that which is associated with the OPAQUE configuration (see {{configurations}}).

### Internal Key mode {#internal-mode}

> In this mode, the client's private and public keys are deterministically derived from the OPRF output. For OPAQUE-3DH, this is done by hashing the OPRF output to a scalar in the corresponding prime order group to produce a private key, and then multiplying that scalar by the fixed generator `G` to produce the public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this mode, the client's private and public keys are deterministically derived from the OPRF output. 
```

> With the internal key mode the `EnvelopeMode` value MUST be `internal` and the `InnerEnvelope` is empty of nil. Indeed, this mode does not need it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the internal key mode the `EnvelopeMode` value MUST be `internal` and the `InnerEnvelope` is empty.
```

~~~
BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, creds)

> Parameters:
> - group, the AKE group to derive the keys in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The group seems implicit, so I think we can remove this.

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- creds, Credentials structure. Not used in this function, it only serves to comply with the API

Output:
- inner_env, nil value (serves to comply with the API)

> - pkc, the client's AKE public key
> 
> Steps:
> 1. _, pkc = DeriveKeyPair(prk)
> 2. Output (nil, pkc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key

Steps:
1. _, client_public_key = DeriveKeyPair(prk)
2. Output (nil, client_public_key)
```

Reviewer: (Just renaming some things)

~~~

> OPAQUE-3DH uses HashToScalar(seed) to derive the client's secret key in this mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OPAQUE-3DH implements DeriveKeyPair(prk) as follows:
```

~~~

> DeriveKeyPair(prk)

Reviewer: I think we should move this to the configuration section, which discusses particular types of Groups for 3DH.

Author: Moved to the configurations sections, please have a look

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key used as seed

Output:
- sk, the client's private key
- pk, the client's public key

Steps:
1. skc = HashToScalar(prk, "OPAQUE-HashToScalar")
2. pck = skc * G
3. Output (skc, pkc)
~~~

~~~
RecoverSecret(prk, inner_env)

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- inner_env, an InnerEnvelope structure. Not used in this function, it only serves to comply with the API

Output:
- secret_creds, SecretCredentials

Steps:

> 1. skc = KeyGenFromSeed(prk)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (client_secret_key, _) = DeriveKeyPair(prk)
```

2. Create SecretCredentials secret_creds with skc
3. Output secret_creds
~~~

### External Key mode {#external-mode}

> In this mode, the application provides the OPAQUE instantiation with the client's authentication material through the `Credentials` structure. An encryption key is generated from the hardened OPRF output and used to encrypt the client's private key, which is then stored encrypted in the `Envelope`. This allows for keys of any kind as long as they are compatible with the AKE mechanism (e.g. RSA or ECDSA in the SIGMA-I setup, not specified in this document). Applications can therefore use existing key pairs for OPAQUE-3DH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this mode, the application provides the OPAQUE instantiation with the client's authentication material through the `Credentials` structure. An encryption key is generated from the hardened OPRF output and used to encrypt the client's private key, which is then stored encrypted in the `Envelope`. This allows for applications which prefer to generate keys using some existing method. 
```

~~~
struct {
 opaque encrypted_creds[Nsk];
} InnerEnvelope;
~~~

encrypted_creds : Encoding of encrypted `SecretCredentials`. Authentication is ensured with the `AuthTag` in the envelop that covers this `InnerEnvelope`.

Functions: Envelope and Recover
~~~
BuildInnerEnvelope(prk, creds)

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- creds, Credentials structure

Output:
- inner_env, an InnerEnvelope structure
- client_public_key, the client's AKE public key

Steps:
1. Create SecretCredentials secret_creds with creds.client_private_key
2. pseudorandom_pad = Expand(prk, "Pad", len(secret_creds))
3. encrypted_creds = xor(secret_creds, pseudorandom_pad)
4. Create InnerEnvelope inner_env with encrypted_creds
5. Output (inner_env, creds.client_public_key)
~~~

~~~
RecoverSecret(prk, inner_env)

Input:
- prk, pseudo-random key
- inner_env, an InnerEnvelope structure

Output:
- secret_creds, SecretCredentials

Steps:
1. encrypted_creds = inner_env.encrypted_creds
2. pseudorandom_pad = Expand(prk, "Pad", len(encrypted_creds))
3. secret_creds = xor(encrypted_creds, pseudorandom_pad)
4. Output secret_creds
~~~

> ## Credential File {#credential-file}

Reviewer: Flagging this as a section that changed in @kevinlewi's PR, too.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it was removed -- can you remove it here as well?

### FinalizeRequest {#finalize-request}

~~~

> FinalizeRequest(client_private_key, password, blind, response)

Author: In external mode, implementations can be free to add the public key here. If added, then the public key doesn't have to be recovered in BuildInnerEnvelope() and the function must be adapted accordingly.

cc @chris-wood

struct {
    SerializedElement data;
    opaque server_public_key[Npk];

>     opaque client_public_key[Npk];

Reviewer: Why is this needed? In internal mode, clients can compute it from the seed. In external mode, clients can also presumably compute it from the private key. Is this for settings where clients can't compute the public key from a private key?

Author: Indeed. I don't know if we can presume that clients can recompute their public key from the private key alone.
As much as I dislike this, simply sending it back to the client covers all cases and simplifies the implementation.

But if you think we should assume public key regeneration possible from the private one I'm totally on board.

Author: Also, deriving the public key from the private key pushes the `auth_tag` verification to be done after the secret is recovered, i.e. we have the secret open and in memory, before we can authenticate the envelope. But maybe I'm just being overly paranoid.

Reviewer: Hmm... how does this simplify the implementation? Does the client need to check that the public key it receives is correct for the given private key?

Author: It simplifies the implementation in case you're using something else than POG and if you need extra data to generate your public key (e.g. for RSA). But I forgot we pinned this to 3DH only. I'll amend.

Author: Fixed. See https://github.com/cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-opaque/pull/154/commits/ad77e8accc08c246dca858aeb9fbf503566ec506

- The MHF has fixed parameters, chosen by the application, and implements the
  interface in {{dependencies}}. Examples include Argon2 {{?I-D.irtf-cfrg-argon2}},
  scrypt {{?RFC7914}}, and PBKDF2 {{?RFC2898}} with fixed parameter choices.
- EnvelopeMode value is as defined in {{client-credential-storage}}, and is one of
  `base` or `custom_identifier`.
- The Group mode identifies the group used in the OPAQUE-3DH AKE. This SHOULD
  match that of the OPRF. For example, if the OPRF is OPRF(ristretto255, SHA-512),
  then Group SHOULD be ristretto255.
  

> To generate the private key in the `Internal` mode, OPAQUE-3DH implements `DeriveKeyPair(seed)` as follows:

Reviewer: I know I was the one who suggested this be down in {{configurations}}, but now I'm second guessing that. Perhaps these should be kept in the external mode section? @kevinlewi, what do you think? (Also, is the generator G defined anywhere?)

Author: external or internal?

Author: It's only used in the internal mode, it makes total sense to define it there, yes.

- The MHF has fixed parameters, chosen by the application, and implements the
  interface in {{dependencies}}. Examples include Argon2 {{?I-D.irtf-cfrg-argon2}},
  scrypt {{?RFC7914}}, and PBKDF2 {{?RFC2898}} with fixed parameter choices.
- EnvelopeMode value is as defined in {{client-credential-storage}}, and is one of
  `base` or `custom_identifier`.
- The Group mode identifies the group used in the OPAQUE-3DH AKE. This SHOULD
  match that of the OPRF. For example, if the OPRF is OPRF(ristretto255, SHA-512),
  then Group SHOULD be ristretto255.

> To recover a public key from a private key, OPAQUE-3DH implements `RecoverPublicKey(private_key)` as follows:

Reviewer: I'm not sure how I feel about this function here. It seems sort of out of place. But we can keep it now and move it around later.

Author: Should we move this to the _dependencies_ section?

The analysis of OPAQUE from {{OPAQUE}} requires the authenticated encryption scheme
used to produce envelope to have a special property called random key-robustness
(or key-committing). This specification enforces this property by utilizing

> encrypt-then-MAC in the construction of the envelope. There is no option to use another

Author: @kevinlewi should the modification be applied here as well?
